===============
python ``bond``
===============
---------------------------------------------------
Ambivalent bonds between Python and other languages
---------------------------------------------------

.. contents::

The Python module ``bond`` supports transparent remote/recursive evaluation
between Python and another interpreter through automatic call serialization.

In poorer words, a ``bond`` lets you call functions in other languages as they
were normal Python functions. It *also* allows other languages to *call Python
functions* as if they were native.

Remote output is also transparently redirected locally, and since the
evaluation is performed through a persistent co-process, you can actually spawn
interpreters on different hosts through "ssh" efficiently.

``bond`` currently supports PHP, Perl, JavaScript (Node.js) and Python itself.


Overview
========

.. code:: python3

  >>> # Let's bond with a PHP interpreter
  >>> from bond import make_bond
  >>> php = make_bond('PHP')
  >>> php.eval_block('echo "Hello world!\n";')
  Hello world!

  >>> # Make an expensive split function using PHP's explode
  >>> split = php.callable('explode')
  >>> split(' ', "Hello world splitted by PHP!")
  [u'Hello', u'world', u'splitted', u'by', u'PHP!']

  >>> # Call Python from PHP
  >>> def call_me():
  ...     print("Hi, this is Python talking!")
  >>> php.export(call_me)
  >>> php.eval('call_me()')
  Hi, this is Python talking!

  >>> # Use some remote resources
  >>> remote_php = make_bond('PHP', 'ssh remote php')
  >>> remote_php.eval_block('function call_me() { echo "Hi from " . system("hostname") . "!"; }')
  >>> remote_php.eval('call_me()')
  Hi from remote!

  >>> # Bridge two worlds!
  >>> perl = make_bond('Perl')
  >>> php.proxy('explode', perl)
  >>> # note: explode is now available to Perl, but still executes in PHP
  >>> perl.eval('explode("=", "Mind=blown!")')
  [u'Mind', u'blown!']


Practical examples
==================

Incremental code-base migration
-------------------------------

I originally needed ``bond`` for migrating a large PHP project to Python. With
``bond`` you can rewrite a program incrementally, while still executing all the
existing code unchanged. You can start by rewriting just a single function in
an empty shell, wrapping your existing code:

.. code:: python3

  from bond import make_bond
  import sys

  php = make_bond('PHP')
  php.eval_block('include("my_original_program.php");')

  def new_function(arg)
      # do something here
      pass

  php.export(new_function, 'function_to_be_replaced')
  php.call('main', sys.argv)


Mixing Python 2/3 code bases
----------------------------

You can use ``bond`` to mix Python 2/3 code. Python <=> Python bonds
automatically use pickling as a protocol, which makes serialization almost
invisible.

In this scenario, you can start writing new code directly on Python 3, while
using Python 2 only for the libraries which are still missing.

For example, you can use ``Mechanize`` on Python 3 with minimal changes:

.. code:: python3

  from bond import make_bond
  py2 = make_bond('Python', 'python2', trans_except=False)
  py2.eval_block('import mechanize; br = mechanize.Browser()')
  py2.call('br.open', 'http://www.example.com')
  title = py2.call('br.title')

``eval_block`` is only being used as an example here to make it self-contained.
A more reasonable solution for larger chunks of code is to split the source
into a distinct file that can be loaded at once in the remote interpreter:

.. code:: python3

  from bond import make_bond
  py2 = make_bond('Python', 'python2', trans_except=False)
  py2.eval_block('import .mypython2lib')

This reduces the amount of clutter and keeps the distinction between new and
legacy code clear. You should also keep in mind that since the remote language
is itself Python, expressions themselves (for whenever ``call`` is
insufficient) can be quoted just by using ``repr``.

Similarly, you can use ``bond`` to combine regular CPython and PyPy runtimes
(all the required modules work as expected on PyPy):

.. code:: python3

  from bond import make_bond
  pypy = make_bond('Python', 'pypy')


Remote/parallel computation
---------------------------

You can easily use ``bond`` to perform remote/parallel computation. Nobody
stops you from having multiple interpreters at the same time: you can create
multiple bonds to setup a poor-man's distributed system with minimal effort:

.. code:: python3

  # setup the workers
  from bond import make_bond
  hosts = ['host1', 'host2', 'host3']
  nodes = [make_bond('Python', 'ssh {} python'.format(host)) for host in hosts]

  # load our libraries first
  for node in nodes:
      node.eval_block('from library import *')

  # execute "do_something" remotely on each worker
  from threading import Thread
  threads = [Thread(target=lambda: node.call('do_something')) for node in nodes]
  for thread in threads: thread.start()

  # collect the results
  results = [thread.join() for thread in threads]

Distributed producer/consumer schemes also come for free by proxying calls:

.. code:: python3

  host1.eval_block(r'''def consumer(data):
     # do something with data
     pass
  ''')

  host2.eval_block(r'''def producer():
      while True:
	 data = function()
	 consumer(data)
  ''')

  host1.proxy('consumer', host2)
  host2.call('producer')

It's even more interesting if you realize that the producers/consumers don't
even have to be written in the same language, and don't know that the call is
actually being forwarded.

``bond`` doesn't even need to be installed remotely: the required setup is
injected directly into a live interpreter. The wire protocol is simple enough
that any language supporting an interactive REPL can be called. In fact, `the
drivers themselves <https://gitlab.com/wavexx/bond-drivers>`_ are designed to
be used from any other language.


Privilege separation
--------------------

There might be times when it makes sense to create an unprivileged context to
perform potentially dangerous operations, such as decoding an uploaded file on
which you have zero trust. A common approach would be to communicate with an
unprivileged daemon built for the purpose, but it usually requires dedicated
effort. Running such processes using ``bond`` instead is almost trivial:

.. code:: python3

  # early in the setup phase of our daemon we create a bond using
  # passwordless sudo, changing to an unprivileged user
  py = make_bond('Python', 'sudo -u nobody python',
		 trans_except=False, protocol='JSON')
  py.eval_block('from mylibrary import decode_file')

  # make decode_file() available as a normal function
  decode_file = py.callable('decode_file')

  # assuming decode_file() takes a file name which is at least readable by
  # the unprivileged user, we can just take it's return value
  data = decode_file(path)

Contrarily to other examples involving Python, here we actually restrict the
serialization protocol to plain ``JSON``. Nothing changes from the caller (our)
perspective, except that the bond now can't share with us anything beyond
trivial types. Python <=> Python bonds use ``pickle`` by default, which is not
sensible here as ``pickle`` allows arbitrary Python structures and handlers to
be run (including bytecode itself).

If just running the context as another user is not enough, then setting up an
LXC container doesn't add much complexity, since we can just use
``lxc-execute`` to attach directly to the new instance's STDIO:

.. code:: python3

  py = make_bond('Python', 'lxc-execute -n <name> -f <config> /path/to/python',
		 trans_except=False, protocol='JSON')

This way an ephemeral container is started/destroyed automatically along with
our daemon. The container itself can expose just a few shared/read-only
directories, or nothing at all if the entire I/O is built on top of ``bond``.


API
===

Initialization
--------------

A ``bond.Bond`` object is not normally constructed directly, but by using the
``bond.make_bond()`` function:

.. code:: python3

  import bond
  interpreter = bond.make_bond('language')

The first argument should be the desired language name ("JavaScript", "PHP",
"Perl", "Python"). The list of supported languages can be fetched dynamically
using ``bond.list_drivers()``.

You can override the default interpreter command using the second argument,
which allows to specify any shell command to be executed:

.. code:: python3

  import bond
  py = bond.make_bond('Python', 'ssh remote python3')

An additional *list* of arguments to the interpreter can be provided using the
third argument, ``args``:

.. code:: python3

  import bond
  py = bond.make_bond('Python', 'ssh remote python3', ['-E', '-OO'])

The *arguments*, contrarily to the command, are automatically quoted.

Some command line arguments may be supplied automatically by the driver to
force an interactive shell; for example "-i" is supplied if Python is
requested. You can disable default arguments by using ``def_args=False``.

The following keyword arguments are supported:

``cwd``:

  Working directory for the interpreter (defaults to current working
  directory).

``env``:

  Environment for the interpreter (defaults to ``os.environ``).

``def_args``:

  Enable (default) or suppress default, extra command-line arguments to the
  interpreter.

``timeout``:

  Defines the timeout for the underlying communication protocol. Note that
  ``bond`` cannot distinguish between a slow call or noise generated while the
  interpreter is set up. Defaults to 60 seconds.

``logfile``:

  Accepts a file handle which is used to log the entire communication with the
  underlying interpreter for debugging purposes.

``trans_except``:

  Enables/disables "transparent exceptions". Exceptions are always first class,
  but when ``trans_except`` is enabled, the exception objects themselves will
  be forwarded across the bond. If ``trans_except`` is disabled (the default
  for all languages except Python), then local exceptions will always contain a
  string representation of the remote exception instead, which avoids
  serialization errors.

``protocol``:

  Forces a specific serialization protocol to be chosen. It's automatically
  selected when not specified, and usually matches "JSON".


``bond.Bond`` Methods
---------------------

The resulting ``bond.Bond`` class has the following methods:

``eval(code)``:

  Evaluate and return the value of a *single statement* of code in the
  top-level of the interpreter.

``eval_block(code)``:

  Execute a "code" block in the top-level of the interpreter. Any construct
  which is legal by the current interpreter is allowed. Nothing is returned.

``ref(code)``:

  Return a reference to an *single, unevaluated statement* of code, which can
  be later used in eval(), eval_block() or as an *immediate* argument to call().
  See `Quoted expressions`_.

``close()``:

  Terminate the communication with the interpreter.

``call(name, *args)``:

  Call a function "name" in the interpreter using the supplied list of
  arguments \*args (apply \*args to a callable *statement* defined by "name").
  The arguments are automatically converted to their other language's
  counterpart. The return value is captured and converted back to Python as
  well.

``callable(name)``:

  Return a function that calls "name":

  .. code:: python

    explode = php.callable('explode')
    # Now you can call explode as a normal, local function
    explode(' ', 'Hello world')

``export(func, name)``:

  Export a local function "func" so that can be called on the remote language
  as "name". If "name" is not specified, use the local function name directly.
  Note that "func" must be a local function, not a function name.

``proxy(name, other, remote)``:

  Export a function "name" from the current ``bond`` to "other", named as
  "remote". If "remote" is not provided, the same value as "name" is used.

``interact()``:

  Start an interactive session with the underlying interpreter. By default, all
  input lines are executed with bond.eval_block(). If "!" is pre-pended,
  execute a single statement with bond.eval() and print it's return value. You
  can continue the statement on multiple lines by leaving a trailing "\\". Type
  Ctrl+C to abort a multi-line block without executing it.


Exceptions
----------

All exceptions thrown by the ``bond`` module are of base type ``RuntimeError``
<= ``BondException``.

``BondException``:
  Thrown during initialization or unrecoverable errors.

``TerminatedException``:
  Thrown when the bond exits unexpectedly.

``SerializationException``:
  Thrown when an object/exception which is sent *or* received cannot be
  serialized by the current protocol. The ``side`` attribute can be either
  "local" (when attempting to *send*) or "remote" (when *receiving*). A
  ``SerializationException`` is not fatal.

``RemoteException``:
  Thrown for uncaught remote exceptions. The "data" attribute contains either
  the error message (with ``trans_except=False``) or the remote exception
  itself (``trans_except=True``).

Beware that both ``SerializationException`` (with ``side="remote"``) and
``RemoteException`` may actually be originating from uncaught *local*
exceptions when an exported function is called. Pay attention to the error
text/data in these cases, as it will contain several nested exceptions.


Quoted expressions
------------------

``bond`` has minimal support for working with quoted expressions, through the
use of ``Bond.ref()``. ``ref()`` returns a reference to a unevaluated statement
that can be fed back to ``eval()``, ``eval_block()``, or as an *immediate*
(i.e.: not nested) argument to ``call()``. References are bound to the
interpreter that created them.

``ref()`` allows to "call" methods that take remote un-serializable arguments,
such as file descriptors, without the use of a support function and/or eval:

.. code:: python3

  pl = make_bond('Perl')
  pl.eval_block('open($fd, ">file.txt");')
  fd = pl.ref('$fd')
  pl.call('syswrite', fd, "Hello world!")
  pl.call('close', fd)

Since ``ref()`` objects cannot be nested, there are still cases where it might
be necessary to use a support function. To demonstrate, we rewrite the above
example without quoted expressions, while still allowing an argument ("Hello
world!") to be local:

.. code:: python3

  pl = make_bond('Perl')
  pl.eval_block('open($fd, ">file.txt");')
  pl.eval_block('sub syswrite_fd { syswrite($fd, shift()); };')
  pl.call('syswrite_fd', "Hello world!")
  pl.eval('close($fd)')

Or more succinctly:

.. code:: python3

  pl.call('sub { syswrite($fd, shift()); }', "Hello world!")


Language support
================

Python
------

Python, as the identity language, has no restriction on data types. Everything
is pickled on both sides, including exceptions.


Serialization:

* Performed locally and remotely using ``cPickle`` in Python 2 or `pickle
  <https://docs.python.org/2/library/pickle.html>`_ in Python 3.

* Serialization exceptions on the remote side are of base type
  ``TypeError`` <= ``_BOND_SerializationException``.


Python 2 / Python 3 / PyPy:

You can freely mix Python versions between hosts/interpreters (that is: you can
run Python 3 code from a Python 2 host and vice-versa). You'll need to disable
transparent exceptions between major versions though, as the exception
hierarchy is different:

.. code:: python3

  # assuming a python2.7 environment
  from bond import make_bond
  py = make_bond('Python', 'python3', trans_except=False)


PHP
---

Requirements:

* The PHP's >= 5.3 command line interpreter needs to be installed. On
  Debian/Ubuntu, the required package is ``php5-cli``.

Serialization:

* Performed remotely using ``JSON``. Implement the `JsonSerializable
  <http://php.net/manual/en/jsonserializable.jsonserialize.php>`_ interface to
  tweak which/how objects are encoded.

* Serialization exceptions on the remote side are of base type
  ``_BOND_SerializationException``. The detailed results of the error can
  also be retrieved using `json_last_error
  <http://php.net/manual/en/function.json-last-error.php>`_.

Limitations:

* PHP <= 5.3 doesn't support the ``JsonSerializable`` interface, and thus lacks
  the ability of serializing arbitrary objects.

* You cannot use ``call`` on a built-in function such as "echo". You have to
  use a real function instead, like "print". You can still call "echo" by using
  ``eval`` or ``eval_block``.

* Unfortunately, you cannot catch "fatal errors" in PHP. If the evaluated code
  triggers a fatal error it will terminate the bond without appeal. A common
  example of such error can be attempting to use an undefined variable or
  function (which could happen while prototyping).

* Due to the inability to override built-in functions, ``error_reporting()`` is
  not completely transparent and always returns 0. It shouldn't be used to
  control the display error level. Use ``_BOND_error_reporting()`` instead,
  which has the same usage/signature as the built-in function.


Perl
----

Perl is a quirky language, due to its syntax. We assume here you're an
experienced Perl developer.

Requirements:

* Perl >= 5.14 is required, with the following modules:

  - ``JSON``
  - ``Data::Dump``
  - ``IO::String``

  On Debian/Ubuntu, the required packages are ``libjson-perl``
  ``libdata-dump-perl`` and ``libio-string-perl``.

Serialization:

* Performed remotely using ``JSON``. Implement the `TO_JSON
  <http://search.cpan.org/dist/JSON/lib/JSON.pm#allow_blessed>`_ method on
  blessed references to tweak which/how objects are encoded.

* Serialization exceptions on the remote side are generated by dying with a
  ``_BOND_SerializationException`` @ISA.

Gotchas:

* By default, evaluation is forced in array context, as otherwise most of the
  built-ins working with arrays would return an useless scalar. Use the
  "scalar" keyword for the rare cases when you really need it to.

* You can "call" any function-like statement, as long as the last argument is
  expected to be an argument list. This allows you to call builtins directly:

  .. code:: python3

    perl.call('map { $_ + 1 }', [1, 2, 3])

* You can of course "call" a statement that returns any ``CODE``. Meaning that
  you can call references to functions as long as you dereference them first:

  .. code:: python3

    perl.call('&$fun_ref', ...)
    perl.call('&{ $any->{expression} }', ...)

  Likewise you can "call" objects methods directly:

  .. code:: python3

    perl.call('$object->method', ...)

* ``eval_block`` introduces a new block. Variables declared as "my" will not be
  visible into a subsequent ``eval_block``. Use a fully qualified name or "our"
  to define variables that should persist across blocks:

  .. code:: python3

    perl.eval_block('our $variable = 1;')
    perl.eval_block('do_something_with($variable);')


JavaScript
----------

JavaScript is supported through `Node.js <http://nodejs.org/>`_.

Requirements:

* Node.js v0.6.12 and v0.10.29 have been tested. On Debian/Ubuntu, the required
  package is ``nodejs``.

Serialization:

* Performed remotely using ``JSON``. Implement the `toJSON
  <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/JSON/stringify>`_
  property to tweak which/how objects are encoded.

* Serialization exceptions on the remote side are of base type
  ``TypeError`` <= ``_BOND_SerializationException``.

Limitations:

* Currently the code expects an unix-like environment with ``/dev/stdin`` to
  perform synchronous I/O.

* Since there's no distinction between "plain" objects (dictionaries) and any
  other object, almost everything will be silently serialized. Define a custom
  "toJSON" property on your "real" objects to control this behavior.

* When executing a remote JavaScript bond with Node.js <= 0.6, you need to
  manually invoke the REPL, as follows:

  .. code:: python3

    js = make_bond('JavaScript',
		   "ssh remote node -e 'require\(\\\"repl\\\"\).start\(\)'",
		   def_args=False)

  When executing "node" locally, or when using Node.js >= 0.10, this is not
  required (the "-i" flag is automatically provided).


Common limitations
------------------

* Except for Python, only basic types (booleans, numbers, strings, lists/arrays
  and maps/dictionaries) can be transferred between the interpreters.

* Serialization is performed locally using ``JSON``. Implement a custom
  `JSONEncoder <https://docs.python.org/2/library/json.html#json.JSONEncoder>`_
  to tweak which/how objects are encoded.

* If an object that cannot be serialized reaches a "call", "eval", or even a
  non-local return such as an *error or exception*, it will generate a
  ``SerializationException`` on the local (Python) side.

* Strings are *always* UTF-8 encoded.

* References are implicitly broken as *objects are transferred by value*. This
  is obvious, as you're talking with a separate process, but it can easily be
  forgotten due to the blurring of the boundary.

* Calling functions across the bridge is slow, also in Python, due to the
  serialization. But the execution speed of the functions themselves is *not
  affected*. This might be perfectly reasonable if there are only occasional
  calls between languages, and/or the calls themselves take a significant
  fraction of time.


General/support mailing list
============================

If you are interested in announcements and development discussions about
``bond``, you can subscribe to the `bond-devel` mailing list by sending an
empty email to <bond-devel+subscribe@thregr.org>.

You can contact the main author directly at <wavexx@thregr.org>, though using
the general list is encouraged.


Authors and Copyright
=====================

`python-bond` can be found at
http://www.thregr.org/~wavexx/software/python-bond/

| "python-bond" is distributed under the GNU GPLv2+ license (see COPYING).
| Copyright(c) 2014-2015 by wave++ "Yuri D'Elia" <wavexx@thregr.org>.

python-bond's GIT repository is publicly accessible at::

  git://src.thregr.org/python-bond

or at https://gitlab.com/wavexx/python-bond
